---
layout:   post
title:    Ode to \u001E
image:    corn-field.jpg
author:   Sean Kermes
referrer: blog-ascii-record-separator
---

Sometimes you need to build a string that holds a bunch of pieces of data
separated by a special delimiter character.  You don't usually *want* to do this -
it's always better to arrays, lists or whatever real data structure your
language provides.  I've certainly been burned enough times by commas in a CSV
to know not to touch that stove.  Sometimes, though, the stars align just wrong
and it really is what you need to do.  I've had to do it to get search result
previews out of Postgresql in a way that didn't have me putting markup in a
SQL query.  I've had to do it in Javascript when a complicated regex meant that
`String.split`'s cross-browser problems made `replace` much more reliable.  When
you run up against this problem, the worst thing you can do is pick a delimiter
character that doesn't appear in your test data, only to have it pop right up
in the full dataset.  Fortunately, help comes from a somewhat surprising place -
ASCII control characters.

Just under space (`\u0020`) are four little characters made just for this
problem.  `\u001C` through `\u001F` are file separator, group separator, record
separator and unit separator.  They'll never show up in regular text, they
don't have any other meaning.  They were literally designed for this purpose.
They're tragically unappreciated, though - I've read reams of
documentation that describe, for example, how to safely ingest CSV data into
one database or another without even a footnote about the separator characters,
even when the document assumes that the source and destination of the data are
under the control of the same programmer!  I've lost days of my life to
misaligned fields in CSV, TSV, and godawful cockamamie WhateverSV files, and it
all could have been averted with a couple little control characters.

So please, I beg of you, learn from my suffering.  (And probably the suffering
of whoever designed the ASCII standard to include the separator characters.)
Never again produce a file or string meant for machine consumption that uses
displayable characters to separate fields and records.  We have the technology
to solve this problem.  Use it.
